MODULE 1 - Backend Foundation and PostgreSQL Setup



1. Backend project preparation

The work was completed only inside the backend folder. No files inside the
frontend folder were changed.

The backend was prepared as a Node.js application using Express.js. The main
entry file is server.js, and the application can be started with the commands:

    npm start       - starts the server normally
    npm run dev     - starts the server with Nodemon for automatic restart

2. Installed packages

The following packages were installed for the backend:

    express             - web server and API framework
    prisma              - Prisma ORM command-line tools
    @prisma/client      - Prisma database client used in application code
    pg                  - PostgreSQL driver for Node.js
    dotenv              - loads variables from the .env file
    bcrypt              - password hashing package for future use
    jsonwebtoken        - JWT package for future authentication
    multer              - file upload middleware for future use
    cors                - allows controlled cross-origin requests
    helmet              - adds HTTP security headers
    express-validator   - request validation package for future use
    nodemon             - development-only automatic server restart tool

Prisma and @prisma/client use version 6 because this version supports the
standard DATABASE_URL configuration in prisma/schema.prisma.

3. Created backend folder structure

The following folders were created to support a clean MVC architecture:

    config/        - shared configuration, including the Prisma client
    controllers/   - future request handler functions
    middlewares/   - future custom Express middleware
    prisma/        - Prisma schema and future migrations
    routes/        - future API route definitions
    services/      - future business and database service functions
    utils/         - future reusable helper functions
    uploads/       - folder for future uploaded files

4. Express server configuration

server.js was configured to:

    - load environment variables through dotenv
    - create an Express application
    - enable Helmet security headers
    - enable CORS
    - parse JSON request bodies with express.json()
    - parse URL-encoded request bodies
    - serve files in uploads/ at the /uploads URL path
    - provide the GET / health-check route
    - return a 404 JSON response for unknown routes
    - include a global error-handler placeholder
    - handle SIGINT and SIGTERM for graceful shutdown

The GET / endpoint was tested successfully and returns:

    { "success": true, "message": "Backend API Running" }

5. Environment configuration

The .env file was configured with:

    PORT
    DATABASE_URL
    JWT_SECRET

The database URL uses PostgreSQL format and targets the Ecom database on the
local PostgreSQL server (localhost:5432). A .env.example file was also added
with safe placeholder values so other developers know which variables are
required without exposing real credentials.

6. Git ignore rules

The .gitignore file was expanded to prevent sensitive and generated files from
being committed. It ignores:

    - node_modules/
    - all .env files, except .env.example
    - uploaded files, except uploads/.gitkeep
    - log files
    - build, coverage, and cache folders
    - common operating-system and editor files

7. Prisma and PostgreSQL configuration

prisma/schema.prisma was configured with:

    - Prisma Client generator
    - PostgreSQL datasource
    - DATABASE_URL loaded from .env

The Prisma Client was generated successfully with:

    npx prisma generate

A reusable Prisma Client was created in config/prisma.js. It exports one
PrismaClient instance and reuses it during development, which prevents creating
multiple unnecessary database connections during server reloads.

8. Database connection at server startup

server.js imports the reusable Prisma Client and calls prisma.$connect() before
the Express server starts listening. The intended startup behavior is:

    - successful connection: print "PostgreSQL connected successfully" and start
      the API server
    - failed connection: print the Prisma error, disconnect, and exit the app

The connection was tested. PostgreSQL rejected the configured password for the
postgres user with Prisma error P1000 (authentication failed). The server setup
is working correctly; the DATABASE_URL password in .env needs to be changed to
the actual PostgreSQL password before the server can connect.

9. Next steps

    1. Update DATABASE_URL in .env with the correct PostgreSQL password.
    2. Run: npx prisma generate
    3. Run: npm run dev
    4. After creating the first Prisma model, run:
       npx prisma migrate dev --name init
    5. Then begin creating models, routes, controllers, services, and CRUD APIs.

No authentication logic, database models, controllers, routes, or business
logic has been created yet. The backend is now structured and ready for those
next development modules.
